Building a Lightweight Call Queue & Auto Attendant Reporting Solution
Executive Summary: It is feasible to build an in-house lightweight reporting solution for Microsoft Teams Call Queues and Auto Attendants using Microsoft Graph API and Teams call records data. This approach can generate a monthly Excel/PDF report containing key metrics (calls offered, answered, voicemail, abandoned, answer times, and agent answer counts) for each call queue, without relying on third-party tools like Clobba or complex Power BI templates. The solution would typically involve leveraging Graph’s call records APIs to extract raw call and PSTN logs, processing them via a scheduled script or Azure automation, and outputting a simple, maintainable report with only essential metrics.
[practical365.com], [uctoday.com]
Data Sources: Microsoft Graph APIs for Call Analytics
Microsoft Graph’s call records data is the primary data source for building a custom call queue/auto attendant reporting solution. Key Graph endpoints include:
Call Records (Call Logs) – Graph callRecords API: Provides detailed records of completed calls (including call queues and auto attendants). Each callRecord object contains start/end timestamps, participant identities (including resource accounts and agents for call queues), and session details for each participant. By filtering call records to those involving a specific call queue or auto attendant resource account (which represents the voice application), we can retrieve all calls that passed through that queue/attendant in a given time period. For example, you can filter call records by a call queue’s resource account ID using a Graph query like: [practical365.com], [practical365.com] [practical365.com]
GET /communications/callRecords?$filter=participants_v2/any(p:p/id eq '{ResourceAccountID}'). [practical365.com]
This yields all call records in which the call queue’s resource account participated, covering calls offered to that queue (including those answered by an agent, abandoned by the caller, or forwarded elsewhere).
PSTN Call Log – Graph getPstnCalls API: Provides Public Switched Telephone Network (PSTN) call detail records within a date range. This is useful if you need additional attributes like caller/called phone numbers, call charges, or call type (inbound/outbound) for PSTN calls routed via call queues. The PSTN log can also help confirm which calls went to shared voicemail (which often is associated with an Exchange resource account that picks up the call). The PSTN call log API allows querying up to 90 days of call data in a single request, which exceeds the callRecords retention period. [learn.microsoft.com], [learn.microsoft.com]
Data Retention & Timeliness: It’s important to note that Graph call records are only retained for ~30 days after each call. Therefore, a monthly reporting process must capture the data promptly (e.g. within a few weeks of month-end) to avoid losing older call records. In practice, running a scheduled data extraction shortly after each month’s end ensures no calls are missed. Also, call records may have a slight latency of up to ~30 minutes to a few hours after a call completes before data appears in Graph. In some cases, call record data arrives in multiple “versions” over time, meaning a call’s record may be updated with new info (like the eventual answering agent) a short time after the initial record is created. Best practice: introduce a small delay (e.g. 4 hours) or verify call record versions to ensure you use finalized data for accurate reporting. [learn.microsoft.com] [learn.microsoft.com] [practical365.com], [practical365.com] [practical365.com]
Key Metrics and How to Derive Them
A custom solution can compute all the essential call queue metrics by parsing the Graph data:
Total Calls Offered: Count all call records associated with the queue’s resource account for the month (each callRecord represents one call attempt). [practical365.com]
Calls Answered: Subset of those calls that were successfully answered by an agent (i.e., had a non-zero duration session with an agent). [practical365.com]
Calls Abandoned: Calls where no agent answered (caller hung up before answer). In callRecords, these appear as calls with no agent session or only zero-duration agent sessions. [practical365.com]
Calls Sent to Voicemail: Calls that timed out/overflowed to voicemail (if a shared voicemail is configured for the queue). These can be identified by checking if the final routing was a transfer to a voicemail resource account or by analyzing the call’s final state (Graph data often flags transfers to voicemail). [learn.microsoft.com]
Calls Answered by Each Agent: Using the participant session details in call records, one can identify which user (agent) answered each call. Aggregating by user identity yields per-agent answer counts. This allows attributing calls to individual agents. [practical365.com]
Time to Answer (Average/Median): Calculate how long callers waited before answer. In callRecords data, the difference between call start time and the time an agent’s session connected yields the wait time. Computing the average or median of these wait durations across all answered calls in the month gives average/median answer time per queue. (Alternatively, Graph’s PSTN call log might provide a call duration in queue metric, but direct calculation from timestamps is often simplest.)
Each of these metrics can be deduced from the raw call data. For example, Microsoft’s own Power BI template defines Abandoned as “caller disconnected before an agent answered or before timeout” and Agent Answered as “caller answered by an agent”. By mimicking such logic with Graph data, the script can classify each call appropriately.
Implementation Architecture for a DIY Reporting Solution
A reference architecture for a custom solution would involve a small ETL pipeline using Graph as input and Excel/PDF as output. A typical approach is:
Automated Data Extraction (Monthly): Use a scheduled script or Azure Automation (e.g., an Azure Function or Logic App, or a PowerShell/Azure Automation runbook) that runs at the start of each month. This job connects to Microsoft Graph using an app registration with the necessary permissions (CallRecords.Read.All and CallRecords.PstnCalls.Read.All). It queries the callRecords endpoint for all call records in the previous calendar month, filtered by each call queue’s resource account ID, and also retrieves PSTN call log entries (as needed) via getPstnCalls for the same date range. [Scheduled...Users Data | Word] [practical365.com], [practical365.com] [practical365.com] [learn.microsoft.com], [learn.microsoft.com]
Data Processing & Aggregation: The script then processes the returned JSON data to compute the required metrics for each queue. This involves:
Filtering and grouping call records by call queue ID or name.
Inspecting sessions within each call record to determine outcome (answered vs. abandoned vs. voicemail) and to capture answering agent identity and answer time. [practical365.com], [practical365.com]
Aggregating counts (total calls, answered, abandoned, voicemail) per queue, and summarizing answer times (calculating average/median) and answered-call counts per agent for that queue. [practical365.com]
Excel/PDF Report Generation: Finally, the script compiles these metrics into a clear report format (e.g. each call queue as a section or table). The output can be written to an Excel file (using CSV or an Excel library) and optionally converted to PDF for easy distribution (using Excel’s export or a PDF generation library). This ensures stakeholders receive a simple monthly report with the key performance indicators they need.
Figure 1 below illustrates this architecture:
Figure 1: Simplified architecture for a custom call queue reporting pipeline – Teams call data is retrieved via Microsoft Graph (call records and PSTN logs) by a scheduled script and compiled into monthly Excel/PDF reports.
Excel vs Lightweight Power BI: In this design, Excel or PDF reports are the primary output, aligning with the requirement to avoid complex BI dashboards. Excel-based reporting is practical via automation (PowerShell or code can generate .xlsx files or CSVs). If graphical visualization is desired without heavy modeling, a lightweight Power BI report could be used purely as a presentation layer on top of already-aggregated data (for example, the script could output a pre-aggregated dataset that a simple Power BI file or Excel PowerQuery pulls in). However, given the request for minimal complexity, directly producing Excel or PDF files from the script is straightforward and low-maintenance.
Microsoft-Native Capabilities and Gaps
Microsoft provides native call queue/auto attendant reporting primarily through a Power BI template called “Teams Auto Attendant & Call Queue Historical Reports”. This official solution delivers interactive reports for call volumes and agent performance, but it has notable complexity and prerequisites: [learn.microsoft.com]
It requires Power BI Desktop and a detailed template (currently version 3.2.6 as of March 2026) to be configured and possibly published to the PBI service. [learn.microsoft.com], [learn.microsoft.com]
It relies on a behind-the-scenes data service (Voice Applications Analytics Collector) and requires setting up a Voice Applications policy or CQD roles for data access and filtering. [learn.microsoft.com]
The template provides extensive analytics (e.g., by day, by hour, timeline visualizations, etc.) which might be more than needed for basic monthly reporting of key metrics.
Gaps in native reporting: While comprehensive, Microsoft’s out-of-the-box solution can be overkill for simple needs, and it doesn’t easily produce static Excel/PDF output. Additionally:
The “Queues” App (part of Teams Premium) introduced in late 2024 provides some real-time queue metrics and basic historical stats (answered vs abandoned per queue, agent call counts) within Teams, but it lacks detailed call logs (e.g., which numbers were abandoned). [practical365.com], [practical365.com]
The Graph callRecords API itself has limitations: call data is ephemeral (30-day retention) and obtaining real-time data on missed/answered status requires careful logic due to the multi-step nature of call processing (calls may pass through multiple queues or auto-attendants, and their records update in versions). [learn.microsoft.com] [practical365.com]
Data completeness: The callRecords are generated from client and service telemetry; Microsoft warns that these reports may not be 100% reliable for strict auditing or billing, as network issues or client conditions can cause missing telemetry. For this reason, Microsoft does not support using their historical report for formal compliance or payroll scenarios. A DIY solution would need similar caution: e.g., ensure that any critical uses (like billing or SLAs) consider potential data gaps or implement validations. [learn.microsoft.com]
Despite these gaps, Graph provides the raw data needed for normal call queue reporting (volume and performance metrics), which is sufficient for IT operations and management monitoring of call queue performance.
Required Permissions, Licensing, and Constraints
To use Microsoft Graph for call queue reporting, you must set up an Azure AD application registration with appropriate Graph API permissions:
CallRecords.Read.All – Allows reading all call records in the tenant. [practical365.com]
CallRecords.PstnCalls.Read.All – (If using PSTN call logs) Allows reading PSTN call details. [practical365.com]
These are Application (app-only) permissions, meaning the script can authenticate as an app (no user needed) to pull all call data in the organization. This approach requires an admin consent by a tenant administrator. Note that a Teams Advanced Communications license is not required for using the call records and PSTN call log APIs – Microsoft removed that requirement in 2020 for contact center (call queue) and compliance recording APIs. [uctoday.com]
Data retention and storage considerations:
As mentioned, Graph call records exist for 30 days post-call. For monthly reporting, the script should run regularly (monthly or more frequently) to capture data before expiration. [learn.microsoft.com]
If longer historical analysis is desired, consider storing the extracted data in a simple database or even accumulating results in an Excel workbook or SharePoint list each month. This way you can retain more than 30 days of data for trend analysis or year-over-year comparisons (something third-party tools often provide out-of-the-box).
Output Format: Generating an Excel or PDF is feasible via multiple methods. For example:
A PowerShell script could use the Export-Excel module (for XLSX) or Out-File/ConvertTo-Html + wkhtml2pdf (for PDF).
An Azure Function or Logic App could transform data to CSV or HTML, then use a conversion service to PDF.
Microsoft Graph’s Excel API could also be used to write data into an Excel template stored on OneDrive/SharePoint and then export it as PDF.
The choice depends on available skills and tools; the simplest route might be writing a CSV/Excel directly in code and emailing it to stakeholders. This avoids the overhead of manual BI authoring while delivering the required insights in a familiar format.
Comparing DIY vs Third-Party Solutions (e.g., Clobba)
Benefits of a DIY Graph-based solution:
Cost Savings: Eliminates expensive third-party licensing. For instance, a Clobba analytics subscription for one business unit was quoted around $9K per year for historical and real-time call queue reporting. A custom solution primarily incurs Azure usage costs (for running scripts or storing data) which are typically modest, plus the one-time development effort. [us-prod.as...rosoft.com]
Customization & Focus: The in-house report can be tailored to just the necessary metrics and format. This keeps the report simple for IT operations and stakeholder needs, without extraneous information.
Ownership of Data: Storing call data in-house (e.g., in CSV, Excel, or a database) gives flexibility in retention and analysis. Third-party tools may abstract or limit raw data access and often keep data in their cloud for fixed retention (Clobba’s base offering includes 2 years of data retention after which additional charges apply). [us-prod.as...rosoft.com]
Trade-offs and Risks:
Development & Maintenance: Building a custom reporting pipeline requires scripting or development effort and ongoing maintenance. The IT team must handle Graph API changes, script updates, and troubleshooting. Third-party solutions come with vendor support and are maintained externally.
Feature Depth: Third-party tools like Clobba or ISI Analytics often provide extensive analytics (e.g., trend charts, real-time dashboards, advanced agent performance metrics) which might be beyond the scope of a lightweight internal solution. If future needs expand, custom solutions might require additional development to match those features.
Data Reliability & Support: Microsoft’s own call queue reporting (via Graph API) might have slightly delayed or incomplete data due to telemetry issues. Vendors may incorporate their own data smoothing or support to ensure data quality and long-term storage. With a DIY approach, the onus is on your team to validate data accuracy and handle exceptions (e.g., re-fetching data after a delay to capture final call record updates, as noted above). [practical365.com]
Expertise Required: Using the Graph API and processing call records demands familiarity with Microsoft’s cloud APIs and possibly PowerShell or programming in C# or Python. If your team has this expertise (as indicated by prior automation projects like directory export runbooks), then the barrier is low. If not, there is a learning curve. [MASCO HQ -...d 08272025 | PDF], [Scheduled...Users Data | Word]
In summary, Microsoft’s native data (Graph call records & PSTN call logs) can indeed produce a monthly Call Queue/Auto Attendant report covering calls offered, answered, voicemail, abandoned, agent performance, and answer times, matching typical call queue KPIs. The recommended approach is to implement a scheduled script (Azure Automation or similar) that retrieves call records via Graph, computes the metrics, and outputs an Excel or PDF report for distribution. This approach avoids the complexity of Microsoft’s official Power BI template and eliminates the cost of third-party tools, at the cost of some initial development and ongoing maintenance. With the right permissions and scheduling in place, a simple, maintainable solution can deliver exactly the “normal call queue reporting” needed for IT operations and stakeholder visibility, leveraging Microsoft-native data without heavy external dependencies. [practical365.com], [practical365.com]
